---
layout: post
category: blog
title: 'Defiance'
date: 2019-11-15 15:48
---

{{page.title}}
================

<p class="meta">15 Nov 2019 - London</p>

It has taken me 5 months, multiple entries on my to-do list and the purchase of a '[progress tracker](https://migoals.com/products/progress-journal)' to get me to write this blog post. Actually, that is not true. Or at least not the full story. About 10 minutes ago, I wrote an elaborate email to some stakeholders in my [NGO](www.jrscholarship.org) about the measures they need to take for an upcoming assessment. It was concise, thoughtful and had been simmering on my to-do list for a while. And it took a maximum of 10 minutes and an awful lot of mental inertia to get it done. It was then I realised: maybe this blog post also requires just that. Some discipline for a total of 10 minutes. 

I have been thinking about starting to blog (again) for quite a while now. But the interest especially piqued after I started interviewing for a venture capital firm. It is usually recommended that you maintain a blog where you discuss market trends on a sector you care about if you are interested in moving into the world of VC. This blog is not going to be about trends in the market (exclusively) or about the fact that I got the most obscure rejection in my life from the firm. But I certainly like the idea of being able to collect my thoughts once in a while, express it and challenge my consistency, writing skills and perspectives.

And thus it begins. Today I want to talk about defiance. Recently, I have been reading about China more than usual as I am hoping to submit an application for the [Yenching Symposium](http://yenchingsymposium.org/). I don't think I had this level of understanding or a sense of personal stance on these affairs as I do today compared to, for example, 2015 when I aspired for the [Schwarzman Scholars program](https://www.schwarzmanscholars.org/). One of the most intriguing pieces I read was on the [Harvard Business Review](https://hbr.org/2019/10/the-kind-of-creative-thinking-that-fueled-wechats-success), where the authors write about the merits of the 'grand design' logic as opposed to 'design thinking', especially in circumstances where there are too many variables and anything is possible. It demystifies some common misconceptions around successful Chinese companies ("Oh, they have a billion people and no competition from the west"), quotes the principles of Allen Zhang who created WeChat as his legacy, and draws parallel to similar cases in the US to postulate the 'grand design' philosophy. 

In a world obsessed with design thinking (which apparently came into picture as early as the 90s), it takes an inordinate amount of faith, confidence and resistance to stay true to an opposing theory - the framework which no one had named yet (afaik) but had proved its effectiveness through the revolution that Apple brought in. It can be difficult to recognise the similarity between Apple and WeChat's strategies amidst the political disagreements that fog the public's perception of China. And some isolation, like that China offers from the rest of the world, was probably a good idea to shield oneself from the naysayers.

That is not to say that design thinking is not adopted in China - I do not have enough information to make that claim. But the idea of the solitary leader, as anti-democratic and exclusive as it sounds, has historically reaped its benefits (Another good example is the founding of Singapore). And maybe that is the core guiding principle of China itself - to set its own standards which are true to a vision and unyielding until complete.

On the other hand, I listened to a podcast episode about the [NBA vs. China row](https://www.stitcher.com/podcast/vox/today-explained/e/64542252) which talks about various instances in history when the US had compromised its projected ideals for financial gains. As wonderful as it is that the NBA is not financially dependent on China enough to revoke free speech from its players, it does expose the fragility of the so-called western ideals and the hypocrisy it hides, as rightly accused by China often. But, I would be lying if I said that there is not a sliver of hope in me that predicts that the NBA will uphold its historic values even if its majority stakeholders end up believing otherwise.

It is important to note that I am not advocating for or against China here. I do not have enough information to take a stance on their issue with Hong Kong. I personally find it worrying that everything that comes from China has the tag 'China' on it and not specific entities - the way the West points its fingers at Google or Facebook. But as a person who would like to listen to both sides of the argument, I am now convinced that it is neither appropriate to hand wave off China while we celebrate the innovations from the US nor believe that Chinese philosophy around business and technology are without merits. (As an Indian, it still gets on my nerves when everything from the US speaks for the entire world) 

As I am writing this, I feel like someone is going to hold this post against me sometime in the future. I am not sure if it is a social conditioning issue developed by growing in an unintrusive (yet) country like India or if it is simply personal cowardice. Either way, I have learnt to understand how polarized debates can be and that it is very infrequent for one party to be completely absolved. As someone who had adopted design thinking without any question until yesterday, this attempt at critical thinking is my first step of defiance.

